                                 CS 61B Lab 5
                             February 20-21, 2014

Goal:  This lab will give you practice writing code that uses inheritance and
Java interfaces.

Please make sure you have a partner for this lab.

No code is provided with this lab.  Write code to experimentally resolve the
following questions about Java.  You will need to show your code to the TA or
lab assistant.

Part I:  Assignments and Casting (1 point)
------------------------------------------
Let Y be a subclass of X, and let y and x be variables of classes Y and X
respectively.  From lecture, you know that the assignment "x = y" is valid, but
the assignment "y = (Y) x" requires a cast to compile, and will cause a
run-time error if x references an object that isn't a Y.

What about arrays of objects?  Suppose xa is an array of X's, and ya is an
array of Y's.

(a)  At compile-time, can we assign xa to ya, and vice versa?  When is a cast
     required?
(b)  At run-time, if ya references an array of Y's, can we assign it to xa?
     Can we then assign it back from xa to ya?
(c)  If xa references an array of X's (that are not Y's), can we assign it to
     ya?  Can we then assign it back from ya to xa?  Does it make a difference
     if the array of type X[] references objects that are all of class Y?  Why
     do you think this is the case?

Part II:  Conflicting Declarations (1 point)
--------------------------------------------
Suppose a subclass inherits a method implementation from a superclass, and
implements a Java interface (that's the "interface" keyword) that contains
a method with the same name and prototype.

(a)  Will Java compile the result? Yes
(b)  What if the method declaration in the interface has a different return
     type?
     This will not work, the error Java returns is:
     error: Dog is not abstract and does not override abstract method pet() in Pettable

(c)  What if the method declaration in the interface has the same return type,
     but a signature with a different parameter type?
     This will not work, the error Java returns is:
     error: Dog is not abstract and does not override abstract method pet(int) in Pettable

(d)  What if the method declaration in the interface has the same return type,
     and the same number of parameters and parameter types, but those
     parameters have different names?
     Yes, that works because of the scope of the paras. Only in scope within the
     implemented method

Part III:  More Conflicting Declarations (1 point)
--------------------------------------------------
Suppose a subclass inherits a "public static final" constant from a superclass,
and implements a Java interface that contains a "public static final" constant
with the same name.

(a)  Will Java compile the result?  Does it make any difference whether the
     constant in the superclass and the constant in the interface have the
     same value?
     Yes, will compile, but it does not matter whether the values are the same.

(b)  Write a main() method in the subclass that accesses the constant using the
     same name used in the superclass and the Java interface.  Will Java
     compile the result?  Does it make any difference whether the constant in
     the superclass and the constant in the interface have the same value?
     No, it will not compile if the constant has the same value or not.

(c)  Figure out how to modify your main() method so that it accesses and prints
     one of the two conflicting values.  (Look to the Lecture 9 notes for
     clues.)  Make sure your code compiles and runs without errors.
     Need to declare variable of static type Pettable to print Pettable's static.

Part IV:  Method Overriding (1 point)
-------------------------------------
Consider a subclass that has a method that overrides a method with the same
prototype in its superclass.

(a)  Define a variable whose static type is the subclass and which references
     an object of the subclass.  If we cast the variable to the superclass type
     before calling the overridden method

        ((Superclass) subclassvariable).method();

     does Java call the superclass method or the subclass method?
     Java uses DML to call the subclass method both times.

(b)  Define a variable whose static type is the superclass and which references
     an object of the superclass (but not the subclass).  If we cast the
     variable to the subclass type before calling the method, does Java call
     the superclass method or the subclass method?
     It calls neither, there is a run-time error when attempting to cast the
     variable to the subclass type.

(c)  Suppose you have an object whose class is the subclass.  Can you figure
     out a way to call the superclass method on that object without having to
     go through the subclass method of the same name?
     Make a new method that calls the superclass method using super.

Check-off
---------
Show your TA or Lab Assistant your code and, in some cases, its output.

1 point:   Give your answers for Part I.  Show the code with which you answered
           Part I (c).
1 point:   Give your answers for Part II.
1 point:   Give your answers for Part III.  Show _and_run_ the code with which
           you answered Part III (c).
1 point:   Give your answers for Part IV.  Show the code with which you
           answered Part IV (c).

Because this lab is on the long side, students who complete the first three
parts but don't have time to complete the fourth part will get 4 points if they
promise to figure out the last part later.
